Daniel's review (#1)
wussler/draft-forwarding: draft-wussler-openpgp-forwarding.md

--- abstract

An OpenPGP user may want to request their email provider to automatically forward
some or all of the messages they receive to a third party.
// It's a bit nitpicky but "offline" here is a bit vague, obviously they need

> // to be online to setup the forwarding, but indeed can be offline afterwards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An OpenPGP user may want to request their email provider to automatically forward
some or all of the messages they receive to a third party.
```

Good for me, no strong opinion. This was taken from the paper

An OpenPGP user might be interested in forwarding their email to
another user without interacting or delegating decryption.
// Also here, "without interacting" may need to be clarified (i.e. obviously they

> // need to interact to setup the forwarding, but not after that).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An OpenPGP user might be interested in forwarding their email to
another user without delegating decryption or interacting beyond 
protocol setup.
```

  - Forwardees to read the transformed email.

This is achieved using a BBS-like transformation {{EUROCRYPT}} on the ECDH
// Is there a less cryptic name for this? This might not mean much to people,
// and also for me the primary association of "BBS" is "BBS signatures", though
// it seems these are a different B, B and S :)

> encryption algorithm using Curve25519.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is achieved using a Blaze, Bleumer, and Strauss (BBS) like transformation 
{{EUROCRYPT}} on the ECDH encryption algorithm using Curve25519.
```

I mean this is the technical term. We can spell out the names?

Author: How about something like
```suggestion
This is achieved by transforming messages encrypted using Curve25519,
with a scheme similar to the one described in {{EUROCRYPT}}.
```
Or, alternatively, since you wrote a paper about it, I think you can also quote yourself here instead, and work that title into the sentence, e.g.

```suggestion
This is achieved by diverting the ECDH key exchange of messages
encrypted using Curve25519, as described in {{FORWARDING}}.
```

this protocol as this forwarding scheme is transparent to them and they are
unaware such transformation is being done.

**Recipient**: The intended recipient of the email, as specified by the sender.
They delegate the trust by setting up the protocol.
// I would call this the "Forwarder", as in a forwarding context "recipient" can

> // be ambiguous.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Forwarder**: The intended recipient of the email, as specified by the sender.
They delegate the trust by setting up the protocol.
```

Good for me. I'll update the rest of the terms in a separate commit if this suggestion is accepted

**Forwardee**: The person who receives the forwarded email.

> **Forwardee subkey**: An OpenPGP encryption subkey generated by the recipient for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Forwardee subkey**: An OpenPGP encryption subkey generated by the forwarder for
```

the forwardee that allows them to read the transformed messages.

**Proxy**: An OpenPGP-aware Mail Transfer Agent (MTA) with the task of forwarding
(some or all) emails intended for the forwarder to the forwardee.

**Proxy parameter**: A parameter that enables the proxy to transform a message from
being decryptable with one key, to being decryptable with another key.
// The specifics of what this parameter is should be defined later, this is just

> // to define the terminology.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Proxy parameter**: A value that enables the proxy to transform a message from
being decryptable with one key, to being decryptable with another key.
```
What about saying `value` instead, since `parameter` is already in the name?

## Key Flag 0x40 {#flag-forwarding}

The key flag 0x40 is added to the first octet of the key flags (Table 12 of {{I-D.ietf-openpgp-crypto-refresh}}).
It indicates that the key may be used to decrypt forwarded communications.

This is intended to prevent implementations unaware of forwarding keys from using this key for

> direct encryption, and thus generating unreadable messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is intended to prevent implementations unaware of forwarding keys from 
using this key for direct encryption, and thus generating unreadable messages.
```

Just reflow

An implementation SHOULD NOT export public subkeys with key flag 0x40.
A public key directory SHOULD NOT accept subkeys with key flag 0x40.

Keys with this flag MUST have the forwarding KDF parameters version 0xFF
defined in {{generating-forwarding-key}}.

# Setting up a forwarding instance

This section describes how to compute a proxy transformation parameter and a forwardee subkey
for a v4 OpenPGP certificate with a Curve25519 encryption-only subkey.

> The original key MUST have an ECDH subkey (algorithm ID 18, as defined in Section 9.1 of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A suitable subkey for forwarding MUST be ECDH (algorithm ID 18, as defined in Section 9.1 of
```

Author: It's a bit confusing to prescribe what a suitable key MUST be, either say what a suitable key is or what the key MUST be (and then it's implied that it's not suitable otherwise :)), e.g.
```suggestion
The subkeys used for forwarding MUST be ECDH keys (algorithm ID 18, as defined in Section 9.1 of
```

{{I-D.ietf-openpgp-crypto-refresh}}) with only the 0x04 (encrypt communications)
and/or 0x08 (encrypt storage) key flags set (as defined in Section 5.2.3.26 of
{{I-D.ietf-openpgp-crypto-refresh}}).
// Very nitpicky but I find these references hard to read if they're intermixed
// with the rest of the text, and also have a comma in them, so I would put them

> // in parentheses as done here (but I've left the others alone).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Very happy with this change

This subkey MUST NOT be revoked and it SHOULD be the most recently generated one,
so that the sender implementation will prefer it to encrypt messages.
// It is not actually defined in the crypto refresh which subkey should be used
// if multiple subkeys are acceptable. In OpenPGP.js, we actually use the first
// valid subkey (in the order they appear in the key), not the most recent one.
// Furthermore, it's not obvious that the most recently generated one (if you
// define that to mean the latest generated one that was generate in the past)
// will always remain the one that implementations choose, even if it is now,
// for example it may expire and another subkey (with a creation date currently
// in the future) may start to be used.
// So, it may be better advice, generically speaking, to either generate a proxy
// parameter and forwardee key for every subkey, or check that there is only one

> // (non-revoked) encryption subkey.

Reviewer: I thought this was more standard practice, this requires then some more substantial changes to the text.

```suggestion
The original key MUST contain at least one subkey suitable for forwarding.
An implementation SHOULD generate a proxy parameter for all the valid subkeys
suitable for forwarding.
```

Author: "A the" -> "The".

Btw, super nitpicky but I wouldn't capitalize "Proxy parameter" everywhere, it looks a bit strange to me. I think it's still clear in lowercase that it's referring to the defined concept.

## Generating the forwardee key {#generating-forwarding-key}

The implementation MUST generate a fresh OpenPGP certificate with only a Curve25519

> encryption subkey.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementation MUST generate a fresh OpenPGP certificate with only Curve25519
encryption subkeys. There MUST be the same amount of subkeys as the number of 
forwarder subkeys being transformed.
```

This key SHOULD have the identity of the forwardee in the user ID.
// While reading this I realized it might make more sense to let the forwardee generate
// the primary key and subkey binding signature (and send them only the subkey packet).
// That way, the forwardee makes sure that the key flags are correct (after all, they
// have more to lose if they're wrong, so they'd have to check them anyway if the forwarder
// generates them, so this would simplify things). And also it means they can control
// the primary key flags as well, and for example omit the signing (and certifying)
// flags, to make sure that they don't accidentally use the key to sign anything.
// Finally, even if they do, it's less of a catastrophe since they then generated
// the primary key themselves, instead of letting the forwarder insert a (primary)
// key into their keyring.
// It does mean that this section should be split up into generating the forwardee
// subkey and (accepting the forwarding and) generating the forwardee primary key.
// I think that's anyway a good thing as some of the text in "Forwarding messages"

> // should go there as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

As discussed in the call

> The forwardee subkey MUST have the following Key Flags,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The forwardee subkeys MUST have the following Key Flags,
```

  - A 20-octet version 4 key fingerprint to be used in the KDF.

> The forwardee subkey MUST be communicated securely to the forwardee.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The forwardee key MUST be communicated securely to the forwardee.
```

The forwardee may accept the forwarding instantiation by generating a key
with the forwardee subkey (...)
// Additional guidance is needed here about how to store the key.

> // See also the comments under "Decrypting forwarded messages".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Moved consideration to the `Decrypting forwarded messages` section

# Forwarding messages

When forwarding a message, the proxy MUST parse the PKESK and check whether
the fingerprint embedded in the PKESK, as specified in {{I-D.ietf-openpgp-crypto-refresh}} Section 5.1.2,
matches the recipient's subkey fingerprint designated for forwarding.
// This is specific to v5 PKESKs, you should also (or instead) specify what to do for v3 PKESKs,

> // since this is for encrypting to v4 keys, that is more likely to be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the key ID embedded in the PKESK, as specified in {{I-D.ietf-openpgp-crypto-refresh}} Section 5.1.1,
matches the recipient's subkey key ID designated for forwarding.
```
It should indeed be Key ID here

Author: I would also say that it should match the forwardee's key ID, not the fingerprint

The proxy MUST change the value of a non-null fingerprint in the PKESK
to the forwardee's key fingerprint.
The proxy MUST change the value of the EC ephemeral public key in the algorithm
specific data of the PKESK to the the encoding of eC, as described in
{{I-D.ietf-openpgp-crypto-refresh}}, Section 9.2.

# Decrypting forwarded messages

A forwardee accepts a forwarding instance by adding the forwardee subkey, flagged
with 0x40, to their private keys' keyring.
// I wouldn't recommend adding it to their keyring without further qualification.

> // They should store it separately, and only use it to decrypt forwarded messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon receiving the forwardee key, the forwardee MAY re-generate a fresh primary key
and attach the received forwardee subkey.
This enhances security by preventing the forwardee from storing a signature-capable key 
of which the forwarder knows the secret material.
An implementation SHOULD keep the forwardee key separate from the generic keyring,
and associated to a specific forwarding instance instead.
```

Author: Strictly speaking, the security risk would come from accidentally publishing such a key (allowing the forwarder to create signatures in their name/published key), not from storing it, so I would say that.
Also, I would make the last point a SHOULD.

The implementation MAY group several forwarding subkeys under a single private
primary key, for a more compact and efficient storage.
// I'm also not sure if this is necessary or advisable. It would be best to store
// the forwardee key in a way that it's connected to the forwarding from that
// specific forwarder, so that the key is only used to decrypt messages sent to

> // that forwarder. This would require storing them separately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Removing, as discussed

## Collusion between Proxy and Forwardee

It is important to note that any forwardee that colludes with the proxy
can recover the forwarder's encryption subkey's secret key material.
This allows the colluding parties to decrypt all messages encrypted using
that subkey, even ones that weren't forwarded (for example because they
were encrypted and received before the forwarding started, or because
only a subset of received messages were forwarded).

To minimize this risk, the forwarder may want to generate a key specifically
for the duration of the forwarding.

It is to be noted that while recovering this private key may allow to decrypt other
messages, it does not allow to impersonate the forwarder's by generating valid
signatures, since key is as encryption-only subkey.
// This sentence is a bit broken, but I would just remove it entirely
// because it's not really a security consideration, and should be at least
// somewhat obvious since this entire thing is only about encryption subkeys,

> // not signing keys.

Reviewer: I would keep a scope limitation here
```suggestion
Given that the signing-capable primary key is independently generated, forging
signatures is out of scope of this attack.
```

In case of collusion between the proxy and forwardee, an adversary may only be
able to decrypt other messages, but not authenticate, sign, or certify other
keys as the recipient.
// This is redundant and partially contradictory with the section about
// Generating the forwardee key, which says that the recipient may have
// 0x10 as well. I also don't see why it can't have 0x08 (encrypt storage)
// too. I would try to remove this section and merge it into the others,

> // if possible.

Reviewer: I forgot to update this for `0x08`. 

I'd propose the following text (github does not allow me to do a diff here)
```
Suitable subkeys for proxy forwarding are limited to flags 0x04 (encrypt communications) and 0x08
(encrypt storage) to limit the scope of the attack in case of compromise.
```

The forwardee encryption subkey MUST be flagged with 0x40 and 0x10 only,
this will prevent other implementations from sending messages directly to this

> key, causing decryption errors when using the wrong fingerprint in the KDF.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Forwardee encryption subkeys have flags 0x40 and 0x10 only, in order to prevent
public key export and stop other implementations from encrypting messages 
directly to this key, causing decryption errors when using the wrong fingerprint 
in the KDF.
```

Author: Strictly speaking, these flags don't prevent key export, they just prevent implementations from using the key in the event of key export, so I would say that instead.
The run on clause "... causing decryption errors" also contradicts the first half of the sentence, as there can't be decryption errors if encryption is prevented :) So I would either drop this, or say more explicitly that even in the event that a message is encrypted to it directly, decryption would fail.

Reviewer: There is in the text the following requirement
```
An implementation SHOULD NOT export public subkeys flagged as 0x40.
A public key directory SHOULD NOT accept subkeys flagged as 0x40.
```
thus why "prevent public key export"

```suggestion
Forwardee encryption subkeys have flags 0x40 and 0x10 only, in order to prevent
forwarding-capable implementation from exporting the public key and stop 
other implementations from encrypting messages directly to this key.
```

// Also this I would merge it into the (to-be-added) section about accepting

> // the forwarding and generating the key and subkey binding signature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Changed the text to be a justification and non-normative

Subkeys flagged as 0x40 MUST NOT be unflagged or reused as the private key

> material is generated from a third party and therefore is not secret.

Reviewer: I'll move this sentence to the normative part. 
For `Key Rotation` below I'll just remove since your addition made it redundant.

When a forwarding is stopped or revoked a proxy MUST delete the stored proxy
factor to ensure that a future compromise does not retroactively endanger

> older messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a forwarding is stopped or revoked, by deleting the stored proxy factor,
the proxy ensures that a future compromise does not retroactively endanger
older messages.
```

removed normative language

// This is redundant with the requirement in the "Computing the proxy parameter"

> // section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Intentional, this is repeated here in the security considerations

## Proxy transformation

The proxy MUST check that 8P is not 0, where P is the ephemeral point included
in the PKESK before performing the transformation, and if this is not satisfied
immediately abort the process.
// I would merge this into the "Forwarding messages" section.
// In general, the Security Considerations are not really the right place to
// put normative requirements. It should be more about considerations that
// are important *even when* following all the normative requirements
// laid out elsewhere, not so much about considerations that went into the
// design and normative requirements of this spec.
Failure to perform this check may leak information about the proxy parameter to

> an adversary that is able to submit messages and see the applied transformation.

Reviewer: This is also repeated, but I agree about removing the normative language here.

```suggestion
By checking that 8P is not 0 and aborting otherwise, where P is the ephemeral 
public key included in the PKESK before performing the transformation,
the proxy ensures no information about the proxy parameter is leaked to an
adversary that is able to submit messages and observe the applied transformation.
```

Filtering message has a security implication in case of compromise: the
messages that were not forwarded may be decrypted by an adversary that can
compute the recipient's key.

> // I would merge this into the considerations about collusion above.

Reviewer: I think it deserves to be reiterated here :)

```suggestion
```
